[Music]
and a warm welcome everybody I'm
tuning in here from the Catholic area of
Southwest France as many of you will
know
my name is David Larimer I'm the program
director of the scientific and medical
Network so Chris Chris I've known Chris
for a long time and he's he taught for
for 33 years at the department of
philosophy and religious studies at
Youngstown State University and is also
connected with the ciis California
Institute of integral studies and
neurotic sciences and he's an advisor to
the Groff Legacy training which I'm also
involved in and he said he writes here
that his passion has been the study and
the philosophical implications of
non-ordinary states of Consciousness
particularly psychedelic States and I'd
like to add a plug as it were for his
book that um isn't on this
particular theme the living classroom
um an exploration of collective fields
of Consciousness and teaching
and this is particularly fascinating in
terms of the the synchronicities that
um seem to arise in in Chris's teaching
and with his students and and he may
refer to that in passing
um so his two books that I've read and
reviewed and this is the initial one
here Dark Knight early door and I think
that's exactly where we are collectively
at the moment and then his book prize
winning book LSD in the mind of the
universe and many of you will have read
his article in the current issue of
Paradigm Explorer so Chris I'm really
looking forward to this presentation
very warm welcome from us and we can't
wait to hear what you have to say
thank you David
let me shift into screen sharing if I
can do this correctly
good okay well thank you David and thank
you everybody it's an honor and a
pleasure to be here with you tonight
uh and I really look forward to sharing
with you the experiences that I'm
reporting in this book LSD in the mind
of the universe
this evening is a question of whether we
can all participate all access the
cosmic mind I'm assuming using
psychedelics
well I believe that we all can but
whether we all should is another matter
entirely
in contrast to the early idea that
psychedelics represent a shortcut to
Mystical experience
my concern is that the Psychedelic
journey into the cosmic mine is
extremely demanding and must be
approached with great care and caution
an LSD in the mind of the Universe I try
to describe as clearly and carefully as
I can experiences that opened in 73
high-dose LSD sessions conducted over 20
years when I was a young man between 30
and 50 years old and this was 1979 to
I spent another 20 years
thinking about these experiences
digesting them mapping them and
pondering their implications
I hope that the visions that I brought
back from this journey will be useful
not only to other Psychonauts but also
to those who would never take a
psychedelic themselves
because what's important here is the
vision of the cosmos that they contain
and a vision of where humanity is in its
long evolutionary journey and the
turning point that we are coming to
now I want to say up front before we
begin that I'm not sure that what I did
was wise
I pushed myself very hard on this
journey harder than was sometimes good
for me
and I sincerely do not recommend this
protocol to others
if I were starting this journey over
again I would be gentler with myself
I would work with lower Doses and
gentler psychedelics
but I made it through intact
and I would not have missed it for the
world
I also want to say that I know that what
I'm presenting tonight is a radical
story
I know it raises many questions that we
won't get to speak about tonight
about the reality of these experiences
about how this path compares to other
spiritual paths
but this radical nature is inescapable
I believe that psychedelics represent a
genuine turning point in philosophy a
true before and after advance
they give us more than new insights into
Consciousness and more than a new
therapeutic method for healing the
wounds of the personal psyche as
important as these things are
the critical use of psychedelics gives
us a new philosophical method that has
two parts
first immersing ourselves into temporary
states of hyper aroused Consciousness
and second stepping back and critically
analyzing our experiences there
by moving back and forth between
non-ordinary and ordinary States Of
Consciousness we can gather and distill
new insights into the structure of
reality
now of course this method is not really
new is it
it was present in the ellessinian
mysteries of ancient Greece and in the
Ayahuasca ceremonies of Brazil that date
back a thousand years
but they are new to us
new to our scientific culture and that's
the point
we are witnessing I think the emergence
of a true psychedelic philosophy
so let's begin
my psychedelic lineage is rooted in the
work of stanislav Groff
I was a brand new faculty member in 1978
when I first read his book Realms of the
human unconscious and my life pivoted
that was followed quickly by his book
LSD Psychotherapy in 1980 in which he
laid out the method for working with
these substances
now Stan has demonstrated that LSD is a
non-specific amplifier and Catalyst of
consciousness
it does not give us specific experiences
rather it hypersensitizes one's
Consciousness for six to eight hours at
a time
everything that follows hinges on how we
use these hours
now stands work clearly differentiates
two different therapeutic modalities
cyclitic therapy low-dose therapy and
psychedelic therapy high-dose therapy in
cyclistic therapy the mind is peeled
away layer by layer uncovering the
different layers of our shadow and
taking us back deeper and deeper into
our unconscious
and psychedelic therapy this is a very
different protocol it was developed and
used at Spring Grove Hospital it was
limited to three sessions maximum and it
was designed to trigger a near-death
type experiences among patients who were
terminally ill
well I thought if you could use this
therapy of hide working with high doses
safely three times you could use it
working safely more than three times
so during the years I was doing this
work I simply saw myself as doing an
extended course of psychedelic therapy
but when I came to the end of this
journey
and was looking back over its length
I came to appreciate how radical this
undertaking had actually been
this went beyond psychedelic therapy as
it was originally conceived and
practiced and therefore it called for a
new term to avoid confusion
and so I've named it psychedelic
exploration
now I worked at 500 to 600 micrograms
this is a very high dose level
the method is the method of psychedelic
therapy complete isolation
and complete protection from the outside
world
trusting your care to a sitter wearing
eyes Shades and working with very
carefully chosen music to Pace the
opening and closing of your session
the difference is the high number of
sessions in my case 73 times
now I think that the stabilization of
the protocol in minimizing the variables
that I followed in my session
contributed to the stability and Clarity
of the Psychedelic window that opened
in my session so I always follow the
same protocol the same sentence setting
the same sitter who was my former wife
my wife at the time Carol who is a
clinical psychologist
same substance the same dose level even
the same location and the same recording
process
I think this provided a very stable
reception platform that allowed my
sessions to develop clearly
over time
now I did this work as rigorously as I
could
I kept detailed records making an
exhaustive descriptive account within 24
hours of each session
I tracked the dates
and that's Rick tarnis is a good friend
of mine and I've learned as we've all
read his book psycheon Cosmos I tracked
the astrological variables to see what
the interplay was between my experiences
and the astrological transits
now I want to emphasize that the story
that I'm telling in LSD in the mind of
the universe is not primarily a personal
story it it's primarily a cosmological
story the personal is the least
important
in my experiences after the first
10 sessions or so
the portion of the experiences that were
relevant to my personal life tended to
come up in the beginning and endings of
the sessions represented by these small
circles that are drawn at the beginning
and endings of these sine waves which
represents psychedelic sessions
when I was coming back leaving and
coming back into space-time I often had
many insights and many gifts given me
about my personal life
but when I was in the peak hours of
psychedelic arousal I was at the top of
these waves and experiencing I was
having experiences at far transcended my
personal life
as represented in these larger circles
and that's the story I'm telling in LSD
in the mind of the universe that's the
philosophically interesting story that
is the universal story and it's a story
which is basically telling the
developmental sequence of experiences
over these Hilltop perspectives
now there are many ways in which you can
use psychedelics let me identify three
uses
first is using it in a to for
therapeutic healing to heal the wounds
of our personal psyche this is the
dominant form in which psychedelics are
being used and studied today
second is to use them for Spiritual
Awakening to cultivate that radical
transparent condition of our being in
which we stand completely conscious
completely naked and completely
receptive to the ever-changing field of
experience
the third usage is cosmological
exploration
these are distinct if mutually
reinforcing undertakings
how you use psychedelics dose levels
circumstances set in setting are
different in each of these settings and
I think it's important to make sure that
we don't judge one project by criteria
that are relevant to another project
okay
now in these experiences
ah
when one works with very high doses of
LSD one goes through a series of death
rebirth experiences in this image the
drop at the center underneath the line
represents our egoic Consciousness our
private Consciousness everything above
the line represents spiritual reality
transpersonal consciousness
the first death rebirth experience takes
place at the interface of our time space
Consciousness and the beginnings of
spiritual consciousness and it's usually
referred to as ego death it is the
complete destruction of our personal
time space identity and the beginning of
an opening into spiritual reality
but if we continue this process if we
press deeper and deeper into spiritual
reality we go through more deaths more
cycles of death and rebirth at the
psychic
subtle and causal levels of
consciousness to use terms that Stan
uses now I have no vested interest in a
particular cosmological map that
delineates the various strata strata of
transpersonal Consciousness here I'm
simply trying to make a point that as
you go into deeper levels of
consciousness you come to certain
gateways and at these gateways you must
give up everything everything you have
known up to this point in time in your
journey in order to enter into the new
fields of Consciousness that are
beginning to open to you
Now One does not simply enter into
spiritual reality and pluck these
experiences from the universe like one
plucks an apple from a tree
drawing on Jorge ferra's insights in his
wonderful book revisiting transpersonal
Theory
I hold that all psychedelic experience
is participatory
this means that our being evokes in
complex ways that portion of the
universe that we encounter
our mind acts as a seed Crystal that
catalyzes a certain set of experiences
from the cosmic Minds infinite potential
as we are gradually purified and
transformed by this process it evokes
still deeper experiences from the
universe in my experience one session
more or less started where the previous
session stopped there was a gradual and
consistent unfolding into deeper and
deeper levels of reality this may not be
true in other people's experiences it
simply is true oh I'm
let me give you a different image for
this process
LSD is often likened to the atomic bomb
which was invented in the same decade
here I'm using the nuclear explosion as
an image of the type of
combust combustive fire that is
generated in a long series of sessions
that generates this cycle of death and
rebirth and as this cycle continues it
activates and brings into our conscious
awareness deeper levels of the of the
universe
just as this nuclear explosion brings
into visible form different levels of
the atmosphere there were always there
from the beginning but were basically
hidden and invisible and it is the power
of the Psychedelic Dynamic that brings
these dimensions of existence into our
into our conscious awareness
now we're not talking about nuclear
explosions we're talking about an
exploration into the mind of the
universe an exploration into the cosmic
mind
when I was at the end of my journey and
looking back over its length identified
different strata different layers that I
had entered systematically over the
course of these 20 years
and I would count five of them
the first having to do with my personal
mind
the second having to do with Collective
the mind of our species
third having to do with archetypal mind
the fourth
causal Oneness
and the fifth
Diamond luminosity
so what I'd like to do now is simply
take you into the book chapter by
chapter with just a few highlighted
comments of the content of each chapter
just to illustrate just to invite you
into
the dialogue that you will find unfolded
in LSD in the mind of the universe
so first
the personal mind
there is a chapter crossing the boundary
of birth and death
this refers to Crossing what Stan calls
the perinatal level of consciousness
now there is a previous chapter the
chapter on methodology where I lay out
the method of the work and there is a
chapter three in which I basically take
the reader into a typical session day to
show them what it's like but contact
wise We Begin here
now if you're familiar with Stan Groff's
work and I'm assuming most of you are
this is classic perinatal material
con deep confrontations with death and
Fetal Sensations severe existential
confrontations tremendous perinatal
seizures purifying the body and the
emotional field culminating in ego death
and an ego death our identity our time
space identity is just turned inside out
in my case my ego death I was forced to
become the exact opposite of everything
I had ever known myself to be the
universe just reached down and snapped
me like a trick a twig
in the beginning of the day I had always
known myself as being male
as being an intellectual
being college educated and being
passionately
interested in
the meaning of life
in this session I was forced to become
the complete opposite of all these
things
and it was as if the universe was
telling me where you are going
gender does not exist
I had to let go of everything I was in
order to go into what was coming next
and what was coming next really
surprised me
in what I later came to call the
exercises of
Collective death and rebirth and the
ocean of suffering
over the course of two years I was
repeatedly and systematically immersed
in experiences of collective anguish
that shattered all my frames of
reference and completely dwarfing the
previous phase
I entered a notion of suffering that
eventually expanded systematically to
Encompass what appeared to be the entire
history of the human species
the dying in these sessions was almost
entirely Collective
the surrender that was demanded was the
ordeal of repeatedly opening to the
sheer enormity and savagery savagery of
this ocean of pain
now first I thought this represented a
deepening of ego death
but it went on for so long and it
involved so many beings that eventually
I changed my mind
I came to the conclusion that these
Collective episodes were not primarily
aimed at the transformation of my
personal consciousness
they were aimed at healing some portion
of the collective unconscious of
humanity healing scars accumulated
through history and still carried in our
Collective memory
now
in my experience in a session there are
essentially two phases there is the
first phase the cleansing phase
purification phase and the second phase
the ecstatic phase
the ocean of suffering I said lasted two
years actually it lasted one year and
then I took a six year break and then it
I started again and the ocean of
suffering resumed in that first year
when I went into the ecstatic phase of
the sessions I entered what I came to
call Deep time
in the chapter deep time in the soul
when I would come out of the ocean of
suffering I entered a state in which
these seven sessions gave me an
experience of my life as a completed
whole as a totality from beginning to
end
the Visions were stable and
systematically developed
each session built upon the previous
session
the sessions their sequences were
repeated unfolding in Greater detail and
with deepening emphasis
now I found that it was an EXT
roordinary challenge to hold on to these
experiences of deep time the first time
I came back from Deep time
the experiences which had been the most
meaningful experiences of my life at
that point in time
I could not hold on to them my mind had
nowhere to place that with repetition
when I would go back to the same state
of consciousness again and again I was
able to hold on to more and more of the
experiences and this is an important
epistemological point
you have to train yourself to stay
conscious in these deep States Of
Consciousness you have to undergo
rigorous systematic commitment to
learning how to stay awake in States Of
Consciousness said that in the beginning
completely swallow you a pull but if you
practice you can maintain
epistemological Clarity in these states
so during this year
I had many teachings about reincarnation
about karmic cause and effect and the
deeper intentionality operating in life
and then I stopped my work for six years
for reasons that I described in the book
when I resumed six years later the ocean
of suffering started exactly where it
had stopped before and continued to
build an intensity over the remaining
year seven more sessions
in a different time of my life
with different expectations and under
different astrological
transits the ocean of suffering began
exactly where it had stopped which I
think reflects the depth and power of
the intelligence and Consciousness that
is directing these episodes certainly
not my intelligence something larger
than my intelligence
when I went into the ecstatic portion of
these sessions I entered a completely
different reality than deep time in the
soul I entered in a sense what I came to
call an initiation into the universe it
did involve transcending time in
different ways but I was given a
systematic series of initiations into
the universe and into the creative
intelligence behind the physical
universe
the sequence was deliberate and well
crafted
it felt like an infinite intelligence
was educating me reminding me of things
long ago forgotten but now in need of
being remembered
now little note
I give my psychedelic sessions names I
take detailed notes I break them down
into bullet points and I give them names
because my intention is to try to hold
all of my experiences in my mind at the
same time and so when I see the name of
a session it reminds me of the content
of the session
so the names of the sessions that I
address in this chapter are this
we don't have time for me to go into
these sessions beyond what I've already
said the name suggests some of the
content
it was just an extraordinary
philosophical Adventure
being taken by what appeared to be the
creative intelligence of the universe
deeper and deeper into the mysteries of
creation and deeper into Humanity's
destiny
when the ocean of suffering came to a
culmination in this session 24 healing
the collective wound I was spun into
archetypal reality
in the chapter the greater real of
archetypal reality let me see if I can
there we go
this lasted one and a half years and 11
sessions
was entering a reality that immediately
and consistently was more real felt more
real Than Physical reality
it was a domain behind physical reality
and the source of the structures that
exist inside space and time
when I first entered archetypal reality
my identity as a human being began to
fall away from me
I learned that we have a sense of a
sense of species identity that is more
basic than our individual identity
and surrendering this species identity
represented a deeper form of surrender
and a deeper death than ego death
to die out of human consciousness was to
begin to exist in a domain of
Consciousness completely beyond the
human species field
this transition was marked with
extremely high levels of energy
I was plunged into white hot lava flows
exploding sunfair flares Liquid Fire
pouring through me completely consuming
me
very different from the death that I had
gone through in the perinatal level of
consciousness
my experience is an archetypal reality
basically could be broken down into two
categories two levels one at the highest
subtle level and one at the lower subtle
level
at the higher subtle level which I would
call the platonic level I encountered
living forms responsible for creating
space-time and the core structures
within space time
they were too vast for me to grasp even
in my expanded psychedelic State I could
catch only glimpses of them I saw them
as galaxies
billions of light years across massive
structures but this was simply the best
my mind could do to wrap itself around
the realities that I was experiencing
these were archetypes but not Plato's
Eternal ideas in the mind of an
unchanging God but vast living Dynamic
forces embodying higher orders of
intentionality and power and operating
on a different order of time entirely
at the lower subtle level at a more
jungian level
I was immersed in the living tissue of
our species
through a long series of experiences I
was repeatedly experiencing our species
as a single organism
interlaced with an intelligent network
of meta functions I experienced all of
our individual Minds as nodal points
within the collective mind I experienced
all the issues that we'd confront in our
life both psychological issues and
biological issues as all part of a
larger living tapestry of cause and
effect weaving throughout the entire
species
I experienced our collect our individual
bodies as cells within our larger
Collective body
and I began to have experiences of
reincarnation as a collective process
up to this point in time I had already
experienced reincarnation or thought
about reincarnation in terms of a
personal Soul generated process
and that and it was about our individual
Evolution and confronting individual
Karma
but I had many experiences during this
time of our entire species
reincarnating with common cause I began
to experience billions of human beings
incarnating over and over again and
driving the evolution of our entire
species forward
I was given many insights into into the
Dynamics of collective purification and
Collective transformation and this is
why in my book dark night early Dawn the
fundamental theme of that book has to do
with the processes the Dynamics of
collective transformation Dark Knight
early Dawn is about the collective Dark
Night and the early Dawn is about our
Collective transformation and history
this was simultaneously a new numinous
experience and a devastating experience
to experience billions of lives as cells
within an organism that was evolving
itself on the face of our planet was
just a devastating experience and an
ecstatic experience
Petals of the S of the sessions that I
address in this chapter are these
you can see how much cleansing is
involved even at this rather
advanced level
and this reflects an important truth
deeper levels of reality are higher
levels of energy
and when one wants to enter if you want
to enter and stabilize your
Consciousness at these deeper levels of
reality you must adapt to and adjust to
this energy it's like mountain climbing
when you climb a mountain you adapt
you're adjusting to less oxygen
when you're working through deeper
levels of consciousness you're adjusting
to more energy you must literally become
a being who can sustain these high
levels of energy for eight hours at a
time
session 28
was my first and brief contact with
causal level reality it was an
exceptionally clear dramatic and
beautiful session
but just touching the purity of causal
level reality was so intense that it
triggered
hours and hours of cleansing that lasted
over three sessions stretched over six
months
the cleansing was some type of
purification process that was making it
possible for me to return to this level
of reality
but to maintain coherent cognitive focus
at this deep level
which then led to a rather startling
experience
the Flesh of God in session 33.
I entered an extraordinary year of
immersion and causal Oneness in a
chapter that I call a benediction of
blessings
it lasted one year in eight sessions
so after spending 18 months exploring
archetypal reality which of course is
very quickly I mean it I just was moving
through this material
just touching base just moving through
very quickly
the year that followed was one of
extraordinary blessings it was a
veritable benediction of blessings as I
entered the great depth
of causal reality
and these are the names of the sessions
that I address in the book
these were preceded by more experiences
of death and more experiences of fierce
purification
the forest was an experience of causal
Oneness of shunyata emptiness of self
no self in me no self in any other just
as sun and
sun and air moves through in a forest
without paying any attention to the
particular type of tree that is moving
through
singing the universe away was an
experience of the Primal void that Lies
Beneath our universe and gives birth to
it day by day second by second
Jesus's blood was an experience of
cosmic love the most intense experience
of love that I had ever known in my life
and then the birth of the diamond soul
and let me mention something about this
just very briefly because it it's really
a pivotal was a pivotal session for me
and it comes up later in the book
previously I had experienced My Life as
a completed whole
now 11 years later
I experienced all of my Farmer lives
being rewound one by one coming together
and being rewound like winding kite
string on a spool
until eventually the spool exploded in a
burst of light fusing all the strands
together and giving birth to what I came
to call the diamond soul
the diamond saw was composed of many
lifetimes but it was more than the sum
of all their years
this experience showed me I think where
reincarnation is taking us it would take
us too long to go into in great detail
but basically I think the visions of
reincarnation that we have lived with
over the last two thousand years are are
incomplete they haven't they have a
vision of that we're we're growing
incrementally Lifetime by LifeTime
becoming more knowing more becoming more
compassionate becoming more intelligent
incremental adjustments
but I think that there is more
at foot underneath this process
eventually we there Comes A Time through
the constant expansion and contraction
through dying and returning to the soul
and being born and Contracting into the
ego and buying and the soul and coming
back into the ego eventually there comes
a time I believe where all of our farmer
lives come together as one and when they
come together as one they catapult us
into a condition of being which is not
simply a refined and purified
future life
it is a being catapulted into a
different order of Life a different
order of being itself I think what is
happening over the long story of
reincarnation is that the soul is being
born inside time and space this is what
I call the birth of the diamond soul
now from here
I went into
the diamond Luminosity work
now notice I've skipped chapter nine I
wish I had actually written these in a
different order I wish I had had 10
before chapter nine but I'm going to
skip over nine for the moment because
the work went into the diamond
Luminosity material
the benediction of blessings felt like
the closing of a great circle
it gave me a feeling of deep completion
a sense of inheriting blessings for work
done
in the ocean of suffering I had given
something to the universe that was mine
to give
and the universe had given me back more
Treasures than I could hold
I felt complete and utterly satisfied
I had no idea where the sessions would
go next
but there was still five years ahead
after going through yet one more intense
cycle of death and rebirth
I was spun into a brilliantly clear
Radiance that Buddhism calls dharmakaya
I came to call it the domain of diamond
luminosity
now I had known light many times before
but this was an exceptionally pure light
this domain captivated me so completely
that it extinguished any interest I had
in exploring the other levels of
existence that had previously fascinated
me
this was a different order of reality
altogether
its Clarity was so overwhelming
its energy so pure
that returning to it became my sole
focus in future sessions
over the next four years in 26 sessions
the diamond Luminosity domain opened to
me only four times
and these are the four sessions that I
described that I present in this chapter
foreign
is
that the diamond Luminosity is an extra
samsaric reality that is it lies outside
the Bardo the outside of samsara outside
all the cycles of physical reality in
the Bartle realities of psychic reality
the pure light it is the pure light from
which the universe arises and returns
it is dharmakaya the clear light of
absolute reality
now in between these four immersions in
Diamond Luminosity there were many
intense episodes of cleansing and
personal healing
in January there were two movements
during this four-year period
there was first a movement of going
deeper into Diamond luminosity
and then a move movement Diamond
Luminosity began to Crunch itself more
deeply into my physical body
and the turning point for this was
session 50. I only began to understand
what was happening after the
fact always I had no control over what
was happening in the sessions I had
basically went along with whatever the
universe was wherever it was taking me
and only figured out after the fact what
was taking place
in session 50 I was as deep into the
universe as I ever went in any of my
sessions I was in the clearest most
Sublime state of diamond Luminosity that
I had ever known
and then in that session
everything in my visual field pivoted 90
degrees and I saw a reality far into the
distance that looked like luminous
galaxies an array of light from that
reality hit me
and it absolutely shattered me
I call it the absolute light just to
give it a name
but what it showed me is that the
universe that we are exploring in these
deep States Of Consciousness is endless
I would never get to the end of the
Divine mind I would never get to the end
of the cosmic mine even using this
powerful method of exploration
this was a turning point in my thinking
because I had adopted the belief
that I inherited from other people
that there was an end point to this
journey that there was the point that
you came to which represented your
ultimate destination
some had described it as Oneness with
God or as the return to the Primal void
but I had experienced one with Oneness
with God many times and what I learned
is that there are many permutations and
degrees of Oneness
and I had entered in the Primal void
several times and I learned that there
too there are degrees of void
when I first entered the diamond
Luminosity It came it brought such a
feeling of homecoming such a feeling of
absolute peace and contentment I thought
that I had finally found what I was
looking for I had finally found my
ultimate destination
and then practically I did it completely
satisfied all my philosophical and
spiritual longing but just at the peak
of this satisfaction the universe showed
me that it is an infinite Journey it is
an infinite being that we are exploring
in our lives
this both first shattered me and then
relaxed me into Infinite wonder and this
is one of the reasons why I would be
gentler with myself if I were doing this
today because one of the things I've
learned on this journey is that the goal
is not to get somewhere to get to a
particular State of Consciousness or
particular state of being
the goal of this work I think is to open
up to the universe and let us much of it
as possible into your being to let us
much of the love and as much of the
intelligence and as much of the power
and Consciousness into your being
and stabilize it and hold it and live
your life
living by its truths
after this session 50 the next sessions
really seem to take me into the diamond
light but the diamond light was
crunching itself deeper and deeper into
my body changing even what I think I
have as the physiological structure the
cellular structure of my body
and now to the chapter I skipped over
birth of the future human
when I began this work in 1979 I never
imagined that Humanity's future would
become part of this story
but now I think this may be the most
important chapter of the book
because it speaks of our children and
our children's children as far as we can
see
of a Crossroads humanity is coming to
and of powerful forces taking us into a
future that will change us at the
deepest levels of our being
in this chapter I summarized bits and
pieces of experiences and visions that
actually go all the way back to the
initiation into the universe material
and run all the way through
up into session 55.
these are the sessions that I discuss
that I presented in this chapter
here I collect the pieces of Visions I
extract them from sessions 23 to 47 and
gather them together in what I call the
visions of Awakening
the there are six visions of Awakening
are six themes that kept showing
themselves over and over in these
Visions concerning Humanity's future
the themes of those six Visions are
Divine love
all Humanity that the universe is trying
to awaken all Humanity
that is being enacted by guiding
intelligence that's guiding our
evolutionary process
our species as a single being again
seeing the Awakening as not simply a
number of individuals or Awakening but
our entire species going through the
Awakening process
the theme of collective purification
again through the Dynamics of
reincarnation that we are undergoing a
collective purification
and finally the experience of the future
human
being given the grace of experiencing
the future human that is being born in
history
but nowhere in these Visions over these
four years nowhere in these Visions was
it shown me how this was going to take
place the vision was that we were coming
into a period of profound Spiritual
Awakening
a shift in the fundamental architecture
of the collective psyche a shift that
will change the foundation of human
existence on this planet
but it had not shown me how
and then in session 55 right in the
middle of the diamond Luminosity
sessions I was taken deep into deep time
and I was given an experience
of the death and Rebirth of humanity
well of the death and Rebirth of
humanity
for there to be a Great Awakening in the
human heart in our Collective human
heart there must first take place a
great death
we must be emptied of the old before the
new can fully emerge
I believe that the 21st century will be
such a Time
it will begin the dark night of our
Collective Soul
a time of emptying of intense anguish of
loss of control and breakdown
a collective purification unto death
that will last Generations
but through this hard labor we will give
birth to something extraordinary
more than just a new civilization
what is emerging is nothing less than a
new order of human being
through the Global Systems crisis our
planet is giving birth
to the Future human
now I first describe these themes in
dark night early Dawn
it sounds quite appropriate for our
times that we are living in now but I
would just remind you that these Visions
were taking place in the early 90s
the Great Awakening session took place
in 1995. 25 years ago
at that time it was completely beyond my
purview that we were going into such an
enormous watershed moment in history
in my Visions concerning the human
where humanity is it was as though the
transformation of humanity as a whole
was the only thing the creative
intelligence really cared about
everything else my life our lives
everything we are struggling with in
history was part of this larger project
it was the context that framed all of
our endeavors
it was the work of the hour
now my Visions did not give me any
details of when and where
so don't ask
it showed me the fact of this Collective
Awakening it took me into the collective
psyches experience of this death and
rebirth
and it gave me insights into the
mechanisms of our Collective
transformation
it's probably not time here to discuss
these mechanisms though I think they're
really important and it has to do two
things with the unified field that the
collective species mind is underneath
all of our individual experiences
and the perception that then the
enormous
suffering that is being that will be
generated by a global ecological crisis
leading to a Global Systems crisis this
suffering will impact not just
individuals but it will actually
stimulate the collective psyches so
deeply it'll shift the collective psyche
into what we would call non-linear
conditions
and we know something about non-linear
systems from physical systems when they
are shoved into non-linear States
and there is a parallel between what can
happen to a psychic system a field of of
psychological energy
and what happens to physical systems
when they are both shoved into
non-linear conditions heightened
creativity higher self-organization the
capacity for rapidly accelerated change
and small inputs leading to enormous
outcomes
the final Vision to bring the journey to
a close just touching it very briefly
actually the seven the three sessions
that I discussed in this chapter the
final vision
this was one of the most intense
sessions that I went through anywhere on
my journey
in it the universe put me through a
strip down that was more violent and
more radical than any strip down I had
ever gone through at any other time in
my journey
and it did so I think in order to
catapult me more deeply into deep time
than did ever taken me before
I won't try to reproduce or tell you
much about that I will invite you simply
to look at it in the book itself
it was the final vision
given me as a Capstone to the long story
of where humanity is going
it showed me things about the
evolutionary process that I have held
dear to my heart ever since
it showed me things about our universe
that our universe is a diamond maker
making Diamond souls and it cares very
little whether it takes a million or a
billion years for us to interest for it
to produce the souls that it is creating
and it gave me my deepest experience of
the future human
an extraordinary being
just
just an extraordinary being
the last chapter
is coming off the mountain
this chapter was the longest to write
and in it I describe two things that I
have struggled with and confronted in
the years after my journey ended
the first I call the deep sadness
I had been given so many blessings on
this journey
I thought that I could simply step away
and spend the rest of my life digesting
these Treasures
but in the Years following my sessions I
began to experience a deep existential
sadness
I had been taken so deep into the Divine
into the Divine expanse so many times
that I was suffering from a loss of
communion with the divine
once you have known the joy of becoming
light
once you have experienced the Ecstasy of
dissolving into the crystalline body of
God
life on Earth can begin to feel dried up
I found that I no longer wanted to be
here
and this is
similar to what some people who have
near-death episodes experience when they
return here they are plunged deeply into
the light the Divine Light filled with
overwhelming love and then suddenly
they're back on Earth with all the
limitations of Earthly experience it's
hard to make that transition
I knew that I was every moment immersed
in the body of the Divine
I knew that she was the root and the
flower of my existence
but this knowledge did not save me
entirely from the pain of being
separated from the full intensity of her
presence
it took me about 10 years
to become fully grounded and comfortable
living inside space-time again
but there was a second Factor
contributing to my disharmony and this
is what I call the sickness of Silence
because of our restrictive laws around
psychedelics I was not allowed to speak
about my experience to others
I am a natural-born teacher I love to
learn new things and share that
knowledge but I was not allowed to teach
from my psychedelic experiences
and the department of philosophy and
religious studies I had to keep silent
about the most philosophically
meaningful experiences of my life
how can you behold under such
restrictive conditions
over time this enforced silence made me
sick inside
living in a psychedelic closet is just
as damaging to your soul as living in
any other closet where you are forced to
deny your true nature
writing LSD in the mind of the universe
and speaking openly about my psychedelic
experiences as I'm speaking to you
tonight
is is been has been part of my personal
path to becoming whole upon this earth
once again
to become in my public life
what I have been in my private life
and in closing I'd like to leave you
with this thought
I still have many questions about what
it means to integrate experiences such
as those that I've been describing
tonight
I think we are still in the early stages
of understanding how entering such
extreme states of Consciousness is
affecting us in the long term
what does it do to a person to hold the
kind of memories that I am holding
what does integration even mean in this
context
how does a time-bound person a
time-bound being exquisitely tuned to
the conditions of space-time absorb
excursions into deep time
how does a finite being digest our
forays into the infinite
what is the residual impact of merging
with all of existence after we have
returned to being just one among many
I am asking more questions than I have
answers for
my life has become a living experiment
in these matters with the outcome still
being determined
but I say again
I would not have missed this journey for
anything in the world
it has been the philosophical and
spiritual adventure of a lifetime
and I take great joy in sharing it with
you tonight
thank you
thank you very much indeed Chris if you
could just stop your screen share that
would be good there we go
and I met my eyes I'm on uh well uh I
don't know how many of you have read
Christy's book or his article and and
the earlier book which I read 20 years
ago you know Dark Knight or early Dawn
um but it's it's it's a pretty
shattering experience to read let alone
go through and one of the things that I
felt was that Chris has done something
on our undertaken this journey on our
behalf so that we can
um borrow in inverted commas some of his
insights and which I think are hugely
important
for our own understanding of who we are
and where we're going and so I just uh
two I'm just going to make two or three
observations then we're going to have a
break and then come back for for uh sort
of questions session
um one of the the main questions you can
ask about what Chris has been talking
about is does
um what he is conveying here give us
access to the Deep structure of reality
or to the Deep deeper structures of
reality and this is something that we
ask in the Galileo commission report in
which Harold argues in the affirmative
in other words that they do and this
would correspond to the third bar of
Jeff [__] who
um that was with us a couple of weeks
ago now do these experiences have
important implications for understanding
of Consciousness and Consciousness and
reality well my answer would be
absolutely but obviously everybody has
to you know make their draw their own
conclusion and what you'll find what I
found is that I I have an extensive
um background in near-death and mystical
experiences in terms of the literature
which many or other people on the call
also have and it's consistent with all
that but it takes it a bit further in
fact a lot off and it's a kind of
ultimate gnosis or knowing by
identification
and then
um observation is that we are clearly
living in
um apocalyptic time
um here
um at one level or another uh and about
the evolutionary prospects and the birth
of the future human
um has an extraordinary resonance
um I think at this time and it's
something that Anne bearing was he's on
the call tonight who was referring to
um last week and and so it'll be very
interesting to see how people feel about
that we've got a lot of questions that
have come up
um already and and in the chat box but
we'll get some live contributions
um and so Chris
um wonderful thank you very very much
indeed for sharing that so lucidly
oh Paul uh from Polo you have a question
hello
yes I'm uh hi Chris hi thank you
a very nice presentation
um I I mean you know whenever you use
the word universe uh something just
sticks in me as an astronomer I know
galaxies Dino Stars clusters of galaxies
vast physical spaces uh that's what
Universe means to me now I have a
feeling the universe in a very different
way but I doubt but again you know I
question whether it doesn't see when
again when you see God I don't mean
Universe
um you know
um the universe
um
it's it's a place where well anyway
that's a it's a long subject I think
I've asked my question anyway if you
could elaborate a little by what you
mean by universe so that
you're absolutely right Paul you've
caught me out on this I struggle with
language I struggle with how to describe
some of these realities that I've
entered
um I don't like using the word God I
don't use it much but I use it once in a
while and I don't like using it because
it carries so much baggage from history
and and what most people mean by God is
not what I mean by God and so I'll use
the word divine sometimes but that's
just a bit of a a ruse because there it
comes back to the same but I'm trying to
strip the concept free of the historical
accumulation
to me I collect pictures of of galaxies
I've collect collect pictures of nebulas
and when I when I move into meditation
practice I I just will play them over
and over and over again because this is
my god this is my Divine and it it but
what I'm referring to or what my
experience is is not to the outer body
of the Divine though I was taken into
exploring some of the body of the
universe but if I were a physicist and I
would love to have degrees in physics
and go into these Estates because they
this Consciousness could have shown me
so much more if I had degrees in
astrophysics and degrees in quantum
theory just my mind could was not tuned
to that type of knowledge
I'm talking about the Consciousness
which is the the consciousness of the
universe the Consciousness which is
given birth to the universe and I'm just
scraping the edges of it I'm just
touching the pieces of it
my experience of it is certainly limited
by what I can understand because and
again what I would love to do is have a
hundred of our best brightest most
talented scientist artists social
activists going into these states in a
systematic fashion I mean can you
imagine a protocol if we had a hundred
of such people working one day a month
for two years what body of knowledge
they would come back with and would be
able to share it's never the experience
of the any individual which is important
it's the experience of our Collective of
our Collective genius and our Collective
Talent as we are engaged so I stretch
language
that I stretched language it's as big as
the universe it's it's deeper than time
it's it's more intelligent than any
intelligence I can ever been able to
touch inside time and space and the
compassion which is the emotion of
Oneness it's when the quantum physicists
talk about you know the implicate order
the Oneness that underlies all manifest
existence that implicant order has a
wholeness that when I touch it it just
explodes me
with love because love is the emotion of
Oneness but I don't mean love in an
ordinary sense of love but it's kind of
the closest approximation I have so
you're right that I I'm using Universe
in the borrowed fashion and I'm using it
in an extrapolated fashion
thank you very much
I I think it's I mean what for those of
you who read the book you you'll you'll
understand that the or the books that
for me the way that you you
articulate these ineffable experiences
into language it gives me the sense that
I'm I'm as near vicariously as I can get
um to to that
um
gnosis the understanding from within and
and in in the Galileo commission we talk
about exploring Inner Space and so in
that sense you're you're a psychonaut
obviously of a exploration of Inner
Space so thank you very much for that
question next question is from our
president uh Professor Bernard Carr
um in London Bernard
oh hi there Chris hey good to see you
and you too first of all thank you for
uh well for taking this this Cosmic
journey and then for coming to coming
back to tell us all about it it was
absolutely engrossing
um I noticed at one point you said you
rather wish you had a degree in
astrophysics and then you will be able
to in another way well I I have a degree
in astrophysics and I rather wish I had
a degree in the psychedelics and then I
could
but my question really is is a follow-up
to Paul tanovitz this question about
um the use of the word Universe because
they're sort of a
a distinction between your constant
references to humanity as a species and
then your description in in cosmological
terms where you know even your images
are are from cosmology
um and you you said that in some sense
that you that was poetic license but on
the other hand it does seem to me that
if you really are contacting in that
greater reality that Cosmic
Consciousness you really will be
contacting
um if you like a cosmic level of
Consciousness not just the terrestrial
level of Consciousness and if for
example one studies the writings of
Buddha when Buddha in the vesuti Margo
and he had his experiences he was very
explicit in the fact that he was
experiencing realities beyond the normal
terrestrial you know the galactic and
the cosmic and things like that so my
question was this although you're always
referring to humanity humanity is is
something which by definition is very
much linked with planet Earth did you
ever feel that actually what you were
encountering was something on a scale
much larger than Humanity in other words
that it really was Cosmic
yes absolutely
um and again I wish I had your degrees
the universe could have taught me so
much more than but when I entered in
dark into archetypal reality and I said
I died as a human being as of my species
identity from that point on in the
journey
my sessions basically took me outside of
the operational range of our Collective
psyche outside of Human Experience
outside of human history when I began to
move beyond the collective psyche
everything associated
and held within the collective psyche
began to Fall Away
all our understandings of God all our
projections of God all all the the
the Flotsam and Judson of History just
fell away and I moved into these hyper
increasingly clear hyper clearance
states of of consciousness
harder to describe because so
contentless and I don't think I
I think we can be very Cavalier about
language and I
and I apologize if I've contributed to
that but
I think when we talk about universal
mind or Cosmic mind it is a huge huge
Concepts and and I would say that
the only part of that mind that I know
and learned about was the part that it
taught me about there was a
Consciousness which took me in there was
a Consciousness that taught me broke me
down caught me grounded me up in the
dust and took me deeper and deeper into
itself but even so I know I was only
experiencing pieces aspects fractal
manifestations of its totality so my
language Peters out at that deep level
in when I moved into Diamond Luminosity
I had a very clear perception of moving
outside of samsara outside the Bardo
into a reality that's truly even outside
archetypal reality there was a period
when I was born into archetypal reality
and then there was a process in which I
was born out of archetypal reality into
a level of reality which pre-exists
before archetypal reality
yeah on the non-physical level yeah
thank you very much absolutely
non-physical yeah I'm just going to take
an observation from the chat from Shide
um about in your Journeys did you get a
sense of why we seem to learn only
through pain and suffering the Divine
Heritage we come from or must return to
why was this path into Mata back back to
into Spirit necessary but of course
that's sort of 64 000.
and it reminds me of this
that you would have heard before
probably that there are only two reasons
we change desperation or inspiration
and where we certainly change if we're
desperate and and we can preemptively
change perhaps if we're inspired I mean
for me
um this is part of the kind of Gnostic
myth that we forget we formed the
darkness we try and return to the light
and we forget who we are we then have to
try and remember who we are we go to
sleep we have to wake up it just seems
to be how things are constituted is that
your view or do you have another angle
of it I agree with you and this is my
experiences when I would go deeper and
deeper and deeper into these levels of
reality I always experienced it as a
remembering I was remembering I was
remembering and I didn't I don't have
any sense that in forgetting that that
was a tragedy or that was somehow my
mistake or some Cosmic sin or some you
know original sin it seemed to be part
of the natural order of things there is
the greater
and there is the Lesser when we come
into the Lesser we forget but we have to
remember everything that we're
describing is constantly changing it's
constantly evolving so that I don't
think I think
I
I think we have had a tendency to sort
of freeze our level of evolutionary
maturity and to form judgments around
how we got here where we're going and
what we're doing and we have to let go
of all these sort of fixated fragments
because the human being as SRI arbindo
said is a transitional being we are
moving from what we were to what we are
becoming we are changing life is
changing planets are changing our
species is changing we are in movement
and so
why things are the way they are isn't on
isn't something that we can answer on an
absolute scale it's something we can
only answer on an evolving
a try to answer an evolving scale but
that of course requires expanding our
time Horizon enormously when a geologist
helps us expand our time Horizon helps
us understand plate tectonics that's
extraordinarily exciting or when a
physicist helps us understand the
evolution of galaxies it's
extraordinarily exciting this is
something similar we have to expand
beyond our personal Consciousness to ex
to have something about the
intentionality that's manifesting itself
in This ever-evolving Magnificent
universe that we are part of
and so we we need to tune into that part
of ourselves
um that and we don't take any more
question questions by the way
um we need to tune into that part of
ourselves
um which knows as you said that we're
here we're here for the ride now fasten
the seat belts or maybe not fasten the
seats belts
um so
um
we if we if we're really centered as we
go through this process
um then we'll get the guidance we need
both individually and collectively but
we need to listen to that that guidance
and we need to enable the new shoots and
there's so much creative thinking going
on I was in a group this afternoon on
the spiritual spirituality and education
Alliance and and so there's a huge
amount of good going on that we don't
hear about except in positive news uh
Humanity Rising thank you that's also
Humanity rising and all the ubiquity
University
um and so we we need to keep ourselves
buoyed up I think by by the positive
things that are going on but also as you
say
um face down
um the negative with with the kind of
Courage that you demonstrated in your
journey
um so I I think I thank you on behalf of
us all
um for the journey you took and for
bringing back these Treasures these gems
and that we can actually appreciate and
we can appropriate some of these uh for
our own journey and understanding
um just because you have made that
journey and so I really salute you
um for that that Odyssey I mean you've
translated into it it's only at the
hero's journey and and just um
uh just a point of information for
people I I mentioned Thomas troward a
moment ago this is a book here which I
would recommend as a good startup from
Thomas trout it's called
um the wisdom of Thomas troward and it
has four of his main sets of lectures in
it and if he was a judge in India you
can really get to grips with this stuff
and and so I I do re and he he talked
about self-recognition when the
universal became the particular in us
then we had to recognize ourselves back
again as the universal
and so he was actually talking about
these things
um in his own way no 100 years ago so um
we're all trying to uh catch up with the
perennial as it were and live through it
so everybody on the call thank you so
much
um for coming and being part of this
evening I hope you've been inspired by
it I hope that you've learned something
that you can apply to your own lives to
your own journey and and Andrew thank
you very much for all the coordination
Jess Jessica cornet thank you for all
the help with the publicity uh and Chris
thank you so much for sharing that that
deep wisdom which we really all need to
take on board
um in the the Rapids that we are
entering at the moment
so
um I look forward to seeing everybody on
a future event and good night everybody
and God bless much love and light to you
all